README.md, before:

﻿# Tag Team ImageTagger

A Windows desktop application for automatically tagging and adding metadata to JPEG images using AI-powered local image analysis with Ollama and Gemma3.

## Features

- **Batch Image Processing**: Process multiple JPEG images in a folder structure recursively
- **AI-Powered Analysis**: Leverages Ollama and Gemma3 language model for intelligent image analysis
- **Multi-Language Support**: Choose between German and English for image analysis and metadata generation
- **Metadata Management**: Automatically extracts and writes metadata to image files using XMP tags
- **Flexible Processing Modes**:
  - **Process All**: Tag all images in the selected directory
  - **Skip Tagged**: Only process images without existing keywords
  - **Classification Errors Only**: Process only images marked with classification errors
- **Settings Persistence**: All preferences are automatically saved and restored on application start:
  - Selected folder path
  - Tagging language (German/English)
  - Processing mode
  - Classification error marking preference
- Possibility to mark images with classification errors for later review. Marking is done by writing `-` to the image **title** tag.
- **Real-time Progress Tracking**: Live updates with current file information, tags, and descriptions
- **Image Preview**: Visual preview of the currently processed image
- **Error Handling**: Mark images that fail classification for later review
- **Parallel Processing**: Process up to 3 images simultaneously for optimal performance
- **Cancellation Support**: Gracefully abort the processing at any time

## Screenshots

![Tag Team ImageTagger Application](Screenshot.png)

## Requirements

- **Windows OS**: Windows 7 or later (tested on Windows 10+)
- **.NET Runtime**: .NET 9.0 or later
- **Ollama**: A running local Ollama instance (see Installation section below)
- **RAM**: Minimum 8GB recommended (depending on image size and model)

## Installation

### Prerequisites

1. **Install .NET 9.0 Runtime**
   - Download from: https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet/9.0
   - Choose the Windows x64 Runtime option

2. **Install Ollama**
   - Download from: https://ollama.ai
   - Run the installer and follow the setup instructions
   - Ollama will start automatically after installation

3. **Pull the Gemma3 Model**
   - Open Command Prompt or PowerShell
   - Run the following command:
     ```bash
     ollama pull gemma3:12b
     ```
   - **Note**: The first pull will download ~7.5GB. This may take 10-30 minutes depending on your internet speed
   - Once complete, Ollama will serve the model at `http://localhost:11434/`

4. **Verify Ollama is Running**
   - Open your browser and navigate to: `http://localhost:11434/`
   - You should see a response confirming Ollama is running
   - By default, Ollama runs on port 11434

### Build ImageTagger

1. **Clone or Download the Project**
   ```bash
   git clone <repository-url>
   cd ImageTaggerUI
   ```

2. **Build the Application**
   ```bash
   dotnet build
   ```

3. **Run the Application**
   ```bash
   dotnet run
   ```

   Or build for release:
   ```bash
   dotnet publish -c Release -o ./publish
   ```

## Usage

### Starting the Application

1. Launch `ImageTagger` executable
2. Click **"Select Folder"** to choose the directory containing your JPEG images
3. Select a processing mode:
   - **Process All**: Process every JPEG image
   - **Skip Tagged Files**: Only process images without keywords
   - **Classification Errors Only**: Reprocess images marked as classification errors
4. Choose a **Tagging Language** from the dropdown:
   - **German**: Generates German keywords and descriptions
   - **English**: Generates English keywords and descriptions
5. Optionally check **"Mark Classification Errors"** to flag failed classifications with a "-" marker
6. Click **"Start"** to begin processing

### Settings Persistence

The application automatically saves your preferences when you close it. The following settings are preserved:
- **Selected Folder**: The last folder you processed will be pre-selected on the next launch
- **Tagging Language**: Your chosen language preference is remembered
- **Processing Mode**: The processing mode you selected is restored
- **Classification Error Marking**: The checkbox state is remembered

Settings are stored in:
```
%AppData%\ImageTagger\ImageTaggerSettings.json
```

If you want to reset all settings to defaults, simply delete this file and restart the application.

### During Processing

- The application displays real-time progress
- Current image preview is shown on the left
- Extracted tags and descriptions are displayed in separate panels
- A log of all processed files is maintained at the bottom
- Click **"Abort"** to stop processing at any time

### After Processing

- A completion dialog shows the total number of processed files
- All images now have:
  - Keywords extracted from the AI analysis
  - A descriptive comment/title
  - XMP metadata tags embedded in the files

## Configuration

### Ollama Settings

The application connects to Ollama at:
- **Endpoint**: `http://localhost:11434/api/generate`
- **Model**: `gemma3:12b`

To modify these settings, edit the `ImageProcessingService.cs` file:

```csharp
private static readonly string OllamaEndpoint = "http://localhost:11434/api/generate";
private static readonly string ModelName = "gemma3:12b";
```

### Language Prompts

The system prompts and user prompts for each language can be customized in `ImageProcessingService.cs`:

```csharp
private string GetSystemPrompt(LanguageEnum language)
{
    return language switch
    {
        LanguageEnum.German => "Du bist ein automatischer Bild-Metadaten-Generator. ...",
        LanguageEnum.English => "You are an automatic image metadata generator. ...",
        _ => throw new ArgumentException($"Unsupported language: {language}")
    };
}

private string GetUserPrompt(LanguageEnum language)
{
    return language switch
    {
        LanguageEnum.German => "Analysiere dieses Bild gemäß System-Schema. ...",
        LanguageEnum.English => "Analyze this image according to the system schema. ...",
        _ => throw new ArgumentException($"Unsupported language: {language}")
    };
}
```

To add a new language, add an entry to both methods with your desired prompts.

### Processing Parameters

In `ImageProcessingService.cs`, you can adjust:

```csharp
// Maximum concurrent image processing (default: 3)
private readonly SemaphoreSlim _parallelProcessingSemaphore = new(3, 3);

// Progress update throttle (default: 100ms for ~10 updates per second)
private const int UpdateThrottleMs = 100;

// AI model temperature (default: 0.5 - lower = more deterministic)
// Retry attempts (default: 6 total attempts with retries)
```

### Application Settings File

User preferences are stored in JSON format. To manually reset all settings, delete the file at:
```
%AppData%\ImageTagger\ImageTaggerSettings.json
```

## Troubleshooting

### "Connection refused" Error
- **Issue**: Cannot connect to Ollama
- **Solution**: 
  1. Ensure Ollama is running (check system tray or run `ollama serve`)
  2. Verify Ollama is accessible at `http://localhost:11434/`
  3. Check if firewall is blocking local connections

### "Model not found" Error
- **Issue**: Gemma3 model not available
- **Solution**: 
  1. Open Command Prompt as Administrator
  2. Run: `ollama pull gemma3:12b`
  3. Wait for download to complete (~7.5GB)

### Out of Memory Error
- **Issue**: System runs out of memory during processing
- **Solution**:
  1. Reduce parallel processing threads (change `SemaphoreSlim` value)
  2. Process smaller batches of images
  3. Ensure other applications are closed
  4. Increase system RAM

### Image Metadata Not Saved
- **Issue**: Keywords/comments not appearing in image files
- **Solution**:
  1. Verify the image file is writable (not read-only)
  2. Ensure the image is in JPEG format (.jpg or .jpeg)
  3. Check file permissions on the target directory
  4. Some images may have format restrictions - see error log for details

## Project Structure

```
ImageTaggerUI/
├── MainForm.cs                  # Main UI form
├── MainForm.Designer.cs         # UI designer generated code
├── MainForm.resx                # UI resources
├── ImageProcessingService.cs    # Core image processing logic with language support
├── ApplicationSettings.cs        # Settings persistence and restoration
├── ImageTagger.csproj           # Project configuration
├── Assemblies/                  # Third-party assemblies
│   └── TagLibSharp.dll          # TagLib Sharp for metadata handling
└── README.md                    # This file
```

## Dependencies

- **TagLib#** (TagLibSharp): For reading and writing image metadata. Please note the included version 
  in the Assemblies folder is a modified build to support more image files.
  You may replace it with the official TagLib# if desired.
- **.NET 9.0**: Windows Forms and core libraries
- **Ollama**: Used for AI image analysis

## Taglib# Modification Notes

The included TagLib# assembly has been modified to improve compatibility with various JPEG files. You may of couse replace it with the official TagLib# if desired, but some images may not be processed correctly.

Modifications include:

in TaglibSharp\IFD\IFDReader.cs, the following modification was made:
```csharp
uint ReadIFD (long baseOffset, uint offset, uint maxOffset)
{
    [...]

    if (file.Tell + 12 * entry_count > baseOffset + maxOffset) {
        //file.MarkAsCorrupt ("Size of entries exceeds possible data size"); // Original line commented out
        return 0; // Modified to prevent marking as corrupt
}
```

## Performance Notes

- **Processing Speed**: Depends on image size and Ollama model performance
- **Typical Times**: 10-30 seconds per image with Gemma3:12b
- **Parallel Processing**: Default 3 concurrent images balances speed vs. resource usage
- **Memory**: Each parallel task uses ~500MB-1GB

## Known Limitations

- Only supports JPEG images (.jpg, .jpeg extensions)
- Requires local Ollama instance (no cloud/API support)
- Currently supports German and English languages (more can be added via code modification)
- XMP tag format for keywords (ensures compatibility with most image viewers)

## Development

### Technologies Used
- **Language**: C# 13.0
- **Framework**: .NET 9.0
- **UI Framework**: Windows Forms
- **Image Metadata**: TagLib# library.
- **AI Service**: Ollama with Gemma3:12b model

### Building from Source

```bash
# Restore dependencies
dotnet restore

# Build debug version
dotnet build

# Build release version
dotnet publish -c Release

# Run tests (if applicable)
dotnet test
```

## License

MIT License

## Contributing

timex-cme

## Support

For issues, feature requests, or questions:
1. Check the Troubleshooting section above
2. Review the error log in the application
3. Ensure Ollama is properly configured and running

## Changelog

### Version 1.1.0
- Added multi-language support (German and English)
- Added settings persistence and automatic restoration on startup
- Preferences saved include: folder path, language selection, processing mode, and classification error marking preference
- Settings stored in AppData for cross-session persistence

### Version 1.0.0
- Initial release
- Core image processing functionality
- Batch processing with recursion
- Real-time progress tracking
- Multiple processing modes
- Parallel processing support

---

**Last Updated**: 2026

Commit message:

Add backup warning to README
Added a warning about making backups before processing images.

README.md, after:

﻿# Tag Team ImageTagger

A Windows desktop application for automatically tagging and adding metadata to JPEG images using AI-powered local image analysis with Ollama and Gemma3.

## Features

- **Batch Image Processing**: Process multiple JPEG images in a folder structure recursively
- **AI-Powered Analysis**: Leverages Ollama and Gemma3 language model for intelligent image analysis
- **Multi-Language Support**: Choose between German and English for image analysis and metadata generation
- **Metadata Management**: Automatically extracts and writes metadata to image files using XMP tags
- **Flexible Processing Modes**:
  - **Process All**: Tag all images in the selected directory
  - **Skip Tagged**: Only process images without existing keywords
  - **Classification Errors Only**: Process only images marked with classification errors
- **Settings Persistence**: All preferences are automatically saved and restored on application start:
  - Selected folder path
  - Tagging language (German/English)
  - Processing mode
  - Classification error marking preference
- Possibility to mark images with classification errors for later review. Marking is done by writing `-` to the image **title** tag.
- **Real-time Progress Tracking**: Live updates with current file information, tags, and descriptions
- **Image Preview**: Visual preview of the currently processed image
- **Error Handling**: Mark images that fail classification for later review
- **Parallel Processing**: Process up to 3 images simultaneously for optimal performance
- **Cancellation Support**: Gracefully abort the processing at any time

## Important

This software is making changes to your image files. Make sure you made a backup in case anything goes wrong.

## Screenshots

![Tag Team ImageTagger Application](Screenshot.png)

## Requirements

- **Windows OS**: Windows 7 or later (tested on Windows 10+)
- **.NET Runtime**: .NET 9.0 or later
- **Ollama**: A running local Ollama instance (see Installation section below)
- **RAM**: Minimum 8GB recommended (depending on image size and model)

## Installation

### Prerequisites

1. **Install .NET 9.0 Runtime**
   - Download from: https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet/9.0
   - Choose the Windows x64 Runtime option

2. **Install Ollama**
   - Download from: https://ollama.ai
   - Run the installer and follow the setup instructions
   - Ollama will start automatically after installation

3. **Pull the Gemma3 Model**
   - Open Command Prompt or PowerShell
   - Run the following command:
     ```bash
     ollama pull gemma3:12b
     ```
   - **Note**: The first pull will download ~7.5GB. This may take 10-30 minutes depending on your internet speed
   - Once complete, Ollama will serve the model at `http://localhost:11434/`

4. **Verify Ollama is Running**
   - Open your browser and navigate to: `http://localhost:11434/`
   - You should see a response confirming Ollama is running
   - By default, Ollama runs on port 11434

### Build ImageTagger

1. **Clone or Download the Project**
   ```bash
   git clone <repository-url>
   cd ImageTaggerUI
   ```

2. **Build the Application**
   ```bash
   dotnet build
   ```

3. **Run the Application**
   ```bash
   dotnet run
   ```

   Or build for release:
   ```bash
   dotnet publish -c Release -o ./publish
   ```

## Usage

### Starting the Application

1. Launch `ImageTagger` executable
2. Click **"Select Folder"** to choose the directory containing your JPEG images
3. Select a processing mode:
   - **Process All**: Process every JPEG image
   - **Skip Tagged Files**: Only process images without keywords
   - **Classification Errors Only**: Reprocess images marked as classification errors
4. Choose a **Tagging Language** from the dropdown:
   - **German**: Generates German keywords and descriptions
   - **English**: Generates English keywords and descriptions
5. Optionally check **"Mark Classification Errors"** to flag failed classifications with a "-" marker
6. Click **"Start"** to begin processing

### Settings Persistence

The application automatically saves your preferences when you close it. The following settings are preserved:
- **Selected Folder**: The last folder you processed will be pre-selected on the next launch
- **Tagging Language**: Your chosen language preference is remembered
- **Processing Mode**: The processing mode you selected is restored
- **Classification Error Marking**: The checkbox state is remembered

Settings are stored in:
```
%AppData%\ImageTagger\ImageTaggerSettings.json
```

If you want to reset all settings to defaults, simply delete this file and restart the application.

### During Processing

- The application displays real-time progress
- Current image preview is shown on the left
- Extracted tags and descriptions are displayed in separate panels
- A log of all processed files is maintained at the bottom
- Click **"Abort"** to stop processing at any time

### After Processing

- A completion dialog shows the total number of processed files
- All images now have:
  - Keywords extracted from the AI analysis
  - A descriptive comment/title
  - XMP metadata tags embedded in the files

## Configuration

### Ollama Settings

The application connects to Ollama at:
- **Endpoint**: `http://localhost:11434/api/generate`
- **Model**: `gemma3:12b`

To modify these settings, edit the `ImageProcessingService.cs` file:

```csharp
private static readonly string OllamaEndpoint = "http://localhost:11434/api/generate";
private static readonly string ModelName = "gemma3:12b";
```

### Language Prompts

The system prompts and user prompts for each language can be customized in `ImageProcessingService.cs`:

```csharp
private string GetSystemPrompt(LanguageEnum language)
{
    return language switch
    {
        LanguageEnum.German => "Du bist ein automatischer Bild-Metadaten-Generator. ...",
        LanguageEnum.English => "You are an automatic image metadata generator. ...",
        _ => throw new ArgumentException($"Unsupported language: {language}")
    };
}

private string GetUserPrompt(LanguageEnum language)
{
    return language switch
    {
        LanguageEnum.German => "Analysiere dieses Bild gemäß System-Schema. ...",
        LanguageEnum.English => "Analyze this image according to the system schema. ...",
        _ => throw new ArgumentException($"Unsupported language: {language}")
    };
}
```

To add a new language, add an entry to both methods with your desired prompts.

### Processing Parameters

In `ImageProcessingService.cs`, you can adjust:

```csharp
// Maximum concurrent image processing (default: 3)
private readonly SemaphoreSlim _parallelProcessingSemaphore = new(3, 3);

// Progress update throttle (default: 100ms for ~10 updates per second)
private const int UpdateThrottleMs = 100;

// AI model temperature (default: 0.5 - lower = more deterministic)
// Retry attempts (default: 6 total attempts with retries)
```

### Application Settings File

User preferences are stored in JSON format. To manually reset all settings, delete the file at:
```
%AppData%\ImageTagger\ImageTaggerSettings.json
```

## Troubleshooting

### "Connection refused" Error
- **Issue**: Cannot connect to Ollama
- **Solution**: 
  1. Ensure Ollama is running (check system tray or run `ollama serve`)
  2. Verify Ollama is accessible at `http://localhost:11434/`
  3. Check if firewall is blocking local connections

### "Model not found" Error
- **Issue**: Gemma3 model not available
- **Solution**: 
  1. Open Command Prompt as Administrator
  2. Run: `ollama pull gemma3:12b`
  3. Wait for download to complete (~7.5GB)

### Out of Memory Error
- **Issue**: System runs out of memory during processing
- **Solution**:
  1. Reduce parallel processing threads (change `SemaphoreSlim` value)
  2. Process smaller batches of images
  3. Ensure other applications are closed
  4. Increase system RAM

### Image Metadata Not Saved
- **Issue**: Keywords/comments not appearing in image files
- **Solution**:
  1. Verify the image file is writable (not read-only)
  2. Ensure the image is in JPEG format (.jpg or .jpeg)
  3. Check file permissions on the target directory
  4. Some images may have format restrictions - see error log for details

## Project Structure

```
ImageTaggerUI/
├── MainForm.cs                  # Main UI form
├── MainForm.Designer.cs         # UI designer generated code
├── MainForm.resx                # UI resources
├── ImageProcessingService.cs    # Core image processing logic with language support
├── ApplicationSettings.cs        # Settings persistence and restoration
├── ImageTagger.csproj           # Project configuration
├── Assemblies/                  # Third-party assemblies
│   └── TagLibSharp.dll          # TagLib Sharp for metadata handling
└── README.md                    # This file
```

## Dependencies

- **TagLib#** (TagLibSharp): For reading and writing image metadata. Please note the included version 
  in the Assemblies folder is a modified build to support more image files.
  You may replace it with the official TagLib# if desired.
- **.NET 9.0**: Windows Forms and core libraries
- **Ollama**: Used for AI image analysis

## Taglib# Modification Notes

The included TagLib# assembly has been modified to improve compatibility with various JPEG files. You may of couse replace it with the official TagLib# if desired, but some images may not be processed correctly.

Modifications include:

in TaglibSharp\IFD\IFDReader.cs, the following modification was made:
```csharp
uint ReadIFD (long baseOffset, uint offset, uint maxOffset)
{
    [...]

    if (file.Tell + 12 * entry_count > baseOffset + maxOffset) {
        //file.MarkAsCorrupt ("Size of entries exceeds possible data size"); // Original line commented out
        return 0; // Modified to prevent marking as corrupt
}
```

## Performance Notes

- **Processing Speed**: Depends on image size and Ollama model performance
- **Typical Times**: 10-30 seconds per image with Gemma3:12b
- **Parallel Processing**: Default 3 concurrent images balances speed vs. resource usage
- **Memory**: Each parallel task uses ~500MB-1GB

## Known Limitations

- Only supports JPEG images (.jpg, .jpeg extensions)
- Requires local Ollama instance (no cloud/API support)
- Currently supports German and English languages (more can be added via code modification)
- XMP tag format for keywords (ensures compatibility with most image viewers)

## Development

### Technologies Used
- **Language**: C# 13.0
- **Framework**: .NET 9.0
- **UI Framework**: Windows Forms
- **Image Metadata**: TagLib# library.
- **AI Service**: Ollama with Gemma3:12b model

### Building from Source

```bash
# Restore dependencies
dotnet restore

# Build debug version
dotnet build

# Build release version
dotnet publish -c Release

# Run tests (if applicable)
dotnet test
```

## License

MIT License

## Contributing

timex-cme

## Support

For issues, feature requests, or questions:
1. Check the Troubleshooting section above
2. Review the error log in the application
3. Ensure Ollama is properly configured and running

## Changelog

### Version 1.1.0
- Added multi-language support (German and English)
- Added settings persistence and automatic restoration on startup
- Preferences saved include: folder path, language selection, processing mode, and classification error marking preference
- Settings stored in AppData for cross-session persistence

### Version 1.0.0
- Initial release
- Core image processing functionality
- Batch processing with recursion
- Real-time progress tracking
- Multiple processing modes
- Parallel processing support

---

**Last Updated**: 2026
